---
layout: post
title:  "Corollary of Master Theorem"
date: 2023-04-10 16:10:51 -0400
categories: jekyll update
---
## Introduction
After a really long time, I decided to update this website. We will see if I can keep this consistent.This time, I will provide my sample proof on one corollary Master Theorem which I will call it Master-Like Theorem. The problem is:
If 
$$T(n) = T(n/2) + \Theta(\log^kn)$$
and $$T(1) = \Theta(1)$$, for some fixed integer $$k \geq 0$$, then 
$$T(n) = \Theta(\log^{k+1}n)$$
For this problem, we can first draw the recurrence table.
Level|Problem Size|Cost Per Problem|Total Cost
---|---|---|---
0|n|$$c\log^kn$$|$$c\log^kn$$
1|n/2|$$c\log^kn/2$$|$$c\log^kn/2$$
d|$$n/2^d$$|$$c\log^kn/2^d$$|$$c\log^kn/2^d$$
L|$$n/2^L = 1$$| $$c^\prime$$|$$c^\prime$$
From this table, we can tell that there are total $$n/2^L = 1$$ level which is $$\log_2n$$ total level, Based on this number, we can work out the total cost.
$$$c\cdot\sum^{(\log_2n) -1}_{d=0}\log^k(n/2^d) + c^\prime$$$
We can make a transformation to make it looks nicer.
$$$ c \cdot \sum^{\log_2 n -1}_{d=0}(\log_2 n - \log_2 2^d)^k + c^\prime $$$
After we have the correct expression for total cost, we need to prove it lies between the range bounded by Big-Oh and Big-Omega. We have to prove them seperately. 
I will first start with Big-Oh case becasue it's more intuitive and also turns out to be much easier.
#### Case Big-Oh:
Since $$\log_2 2^d = d$$ and $$d \geq 0$$, $$(\log_2 n - \log_2 2^d)^k$$ will always smaller than $$\log^k_2 n$$.
This shows that,


$$\begin{aligned}
    c \cdot \sum^{\log_2 n -1}_{d=0}(\log_2 n - \log_2 2^d)^k + c^\prime &\leq c \cdot \sum^{\log_2 n -1}_{d=0}(\log_2 n)^k + c^\prime \\
    c \cdot \sum^{\log_2 n -1}_{d=0}\log^k_2 (n/2^d) + c^\prime &\leq c \cdot \sum^{\log_2 n -1}_{d=0}(\log_2 n)^k + c^\prime  \\ 
    &= c \cdot \log_2 n \cdot (\log_2 n)^k + c^\prime \\
    &= c \cdot \log^{k+1}_2 n + c^\prime 
\end{aligned}$$

Because $$c$$ and $$c^\prime$$ are both constant, let $$g(n) =\log^{k+1}_2 n $$, $$f(n) =\sum^{\log_2 n -1}_{d=0}\log^k (n/2^d) + c^\prime$$, if $$c, N> 0$$
$$f(n) \leq c \cdot g(n)$$
for all $$n \geq N$$, then 
$$f(n) = O(g(n)) = O(\log^{k+1}_2 n)$$
This finishes the proof for Big-Oh case. One thing to notice that I use log base 2 in my proof but I think this can be generalized into any base because you can do the base transformation trick. It may be worth to explore if the proof will be easier given speficied base.
#### Case Big-Omega:
This will be a lot harder.
Expanding the equation of total work we got from table, the summation part will be,
$$(\log_2 n )^k + (\log_2 n -1)^k + (\log_2 n -2)^k + \dots + 2^k + 1^k$$
We can then transform these sums into

$$\sum^{\log_2 n}_{d=1} d^k$$

which 
$$$ \sum^{\log_2 n}_{d=\frac{\log_2 n}{2}} d^k \leq \sum^{\log_2 n}_{d=1} d^k$$$
Since on the left side of inequality, $$d$$ goes from $$\frac{\log_2 n}{2}$$ to $$\log_2 n$$ , let $$d$$ in $$d^k$$ be $$\frac{\log_2 n}{2}$$, the new inequality,
$$\sum^{\log_2 n}_{d=\frac{\log_2 n}{2}} (\frac{\log_2 n}{2})^k \leq \sum^{\log_2 n}_{d=\frac{\log_2 n}{2}} d^k$$
The left side's sum will be 
$$$(\frac{\log_2 n}{2} + 1) \cdot (\frac{\log_2 n}{2})^k = (\frac{\log^{k+1}_2 n}{2^{k+1}}) + (\frac{\log^k_2 n}{2^k}) \geq (\frac{\log^{k+1}_2 n}{2^{k+1}}) $$$
Overall, we can put all inequalities together,
$$(\frac{\log^{k+1}_2 n}{2^{k+1}}) \leq \sum^{\log_2 n}_{d=\frac{\log_2 n}{2}} (\frac{\log_2 n}{2})^k \leq 
\sum^{\log_2 n}_{d=\frac{\log_2 n}{2}} d^k \leq \sum^{\log_2 n}_{d=1} d^k = \sum^{\log_2 n -1}_{d=0}\log^k (n/2^d)$$
Since $$k$$ is constant and $$k \geq 0$$, $$\frac{1}{2^{k+1}}$$ will also be constant and bigger than 0. Let $$c = 1/2^{k+1}$$,$$N > 0$$, $$g(n) = \log^{k+1}_2 n$$, and $$f(n) = \sum^{\log_2 n -1}_{d=0}\log^k (n/2^d)$$, there is an inequality,
$$f(n) \geq c \cdot g(n)$$
for all $$n \geq N$$, then
$$f(n)  = \Omega(g(n)) = \Omega(\log^{k+1}_2 n)$$
Overall, since 
$$\Omega(\log^{k+1}_2 n) \leq f(n) \leq O(\log^{k+1}_2 n)$$
then
$$f(n) = \Theta(\log^{k+1}_2 n) = \sum^{\log_2 n -1}_{d=0}\log^k (n/2^d)$$
which also means
$$T(n) =\Theta(\log^{k+1}_2 n)$$
$$\blacksquare$$
The main point is to find reduce some large summation and try to find one constant that is smaller than this large summation and lies in the range of Big-Omega.
The format may not look good but I don't think this will be a big deal lol.

















